---
title: Computational Information Density as Order Parameter
date: 2025-08-18 05:50 +0800
description: LZ77 Compression, Computational Information Density, and Phase Transitions
categories: [physics, statistical-physics]
tags: [paper-reading]
math: true
toc: false
---

$$
    \def\argmin{\mathop{\mathrm{argmin}}}
    \def\argmax{\mathop{\mathrm{argmax}}}
    \def\expectation{\mathop{\mathbb{E}}}
    \def\dom{\mathrm{dom}}
    \def\R{\mathbb{R}}
$$

This paper begins with the intuition that, the more ordered a system is, the shorter the description required to specify a typical microstate. When the probability distribution is _a priori_ known, then we can calculate the Shannon entropy of each microstate. However, in non-equilibrium states, this is an impossible task. The Kolmogorov complexity was designed for this purpose, but it is well-known that the Kolmogorov complexity is incomputable in most cases.

## Compuational Information Density

The authors propose the _computational information density_ as a means to tackle this problem.

> **Definition** (CID) The computational information density is defined as
>
> $$
\mathrm{CID} = \frac{\mathcal{L}(x)}{L}
> $$
>
> Where $\mathcal{L}(x)$ is the total binary code length of the compressed sequence, and $L$ is the length of the original sequence $x$.

The authors perform Lempel-Ziv string-matching algorithms (LZ77) to compress a sequence. Informally, LZ77 moves a cursor down the sequence. We search for the 'longest previous factor' (LPF), which is the longest sequence starting from the cursor, which has already occurred in the past. Each LPF is represeted as $(i,\ell)$, where $i$ is the starting index and $\ell$ is the length of the matching subsequence. If the character has not yet been found, then the chacter is stored as a new element in the alphabet, and the LPF length is set to $0$. For instance, the sequence

$$
x = abcbabababab
$$

of length $L = 12$ and alphabet $$\{a,b,c\}$$ of size $3$ can be compressed into the LPF array $$\{(a,0), (b,0), (c,0), (2,1), (1,2), (5,6)\}$$.

In reality, different implementations of LZ77 can greatly enhance the performance. The authors implement the KKP2 algorithm stated in [2]. A more convenient way of performing LZ77 factorization is the use the _pydivsufsort_ package in Python.

The compressed length $\mathcal{L}(x)$ can be bounded using the number of LPFs, denoted as $C$, as follows. First, it takes
$$\log(|\alpha|+L)$$
bits to specify a position in the sequence $x$ of length $L$ or a location in the alphabet of length $\alpha$. It takes $\log \ell_j + O(\log \log \ell_j)$ bits to specify $\ell_j$, the length of the matching subsequence for the $j$th factor. Therefore, $\mathcal{L}(x)$ is bounded as

$$
\mathcal{L}(x) \le C \log(L + |\alpha|) + \sum^C_{j=1} \log \ell_j + O\left( \sum^C_{j=1} \log \log \ell_j \right) \le C \log C + 2C \log \frac{L}{C} + O\left( C \log \log \frac{L}{C} \right)
$$

The authors instead use this bound to calculate the computational information density.

## CID as a Meausure of Entropy

The authors propose that CID can be a computable approximation of Shannon entropy as $L \to \infty$. Indeed, for systems with exactly known entropy (such as Bernoulli sequences or the Ising models), the CID converges with a speed of $\log \log L / \log L$ (which is very slow).

## CID as an Order Parameter

The authors claim that CID can be a measure of 'hidden order'. To support this claim, the authors look at two discrete models (conserved lattice gas, Manna model) and two continuous models (random organization and Brownian motion). Here we only look at the conserved lattice gas (CLG) model.

- Each state is represented as a 1D binary sequence of length $L$ with periodic boundary conditions.
- Initially, $N \le L$ particles are randomly distributed.
- A site with only one occupied neighbor is considered 'active', otherwise 'passive'.
- For each update, all active sites move to the unoccupied site.
- If no active sites are present, then the dynamics end and the final state is considerd an 'absorbing state'.

When the density $\rho = N/L$ is increased, at a critical density of $\rho = 0.5$, the system undergoes a phase transition from absorbed to active (never ending dynamics). As time passes, CID also undergoes a phase transition as $\rho$ is increased. More importantly, CID can effectively distinguish an absorbed state generated from the CLG dynamics, from a randomly generated absorbed state.

## References

[1] Martiniani, S., Chaikin, P. M., & Levine, D. (2019). Quantifying Hidden Order out of Equilibrium. Physical Review X, 9(1), 011031. \
[2] Kärkkäinen, J., Kempa, D., & Puglisi, S. J. (2016). Lazy Lempel-Ziv factorization algorithms. Journal of Experimental Algorithmics, 21(1), 1–19.
