---
title: Sharpness-Aware Minimization
date: 2025-09-17 05:50 +0800
description: Sharpness-aware minimization and finding flatter minima.
categories: [optimization, ml-optimization]
math: true
toc: false
---

$$
    \def\argmin{\mathop{\mathrm{argmin}}}
    \def\argmax{\mathop{\mathrm{argmax}}}
    \def\expectation{\mathop{\mathbb{E}}}
    \def\R{\mathbb{R}}
$$

The current consensus (although challenged) is that flatter minima generalize better. The authors aim to find flatter minima by finding optimal points whose entire neighborhood has low loss. The optimization problem then becomes the following minimax problem.

$$
\min_{w} \left\{ \max_{\| \varepsilon \|_p \le \rho} \ell(w + \varepsilon) + \lambda \|w\|^2_2 \right \}
$$

Assuming that $\rho$ is small, a first-order Taylor expansion of $\ell$ around $w$ is used to enhance performance. In such a case, the optimal $\varepsilon$ value is

$$
\varepsilon^\star(w) = \argmax_{\| \varepsilon \|^2_p \le \rho} \left\{ \ell(w) + \varepsilon^\top \nabla_w \ell(w) \right\} = \argmax_{\| \varepsilon \|^2_p \le \rho} \, \varepsilon^\top \nabla_w \ell(w)
$$

Hence, the optimal value is given by the solution to the dual norm problem.

$$
\hat{\varepsilon}(w) = \rho \, \mathrm{sgn}\left( \nabla_w \ell(w) \right) \frac{| \nabla_w \ell(w) |^{q-1}}{\left( \|\nabla_w \ell(w)\|^q_q \right)^{1/p}}
$$

where absolute values and $\cdot^{q-1}$ are elementwise operations. The authors later find that $p=2$ is typically optimal. Then the objective function $\ell(w + \hat{\varepsilon}(w))$ is optimized using a base optimizer, such as SGD. By Taylor expanding this function and dropping all higher order terms, the authors use the heuristics

$$
\nabla_w \ell(w + \hat{\varepsilon}(w)) \approx \nabla_w \ell(w) |_{w + \hat{\varepsilon}(w)}
$$

If the value $p=2$ is used, then each step of SAM, when the base optimizer is SGD, is simply

$$
w_{t+1} = w_t - \eta \nabla \ell\left( w_t + \rho \frac{\nabla \ell(w)}{\| \nabla \ell(w) \|} \right)
$$
